Update secret management documentation (#29736)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/agent/configuration/secrets-management.md

  tags: ['secrets', 'secrets executable', 'secrets provider', 'list secrets']
---

## Overview

> The Datadog Agent allows you to securely manage secrets by integrating with any external secrets management (HashiCorp Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, a custom solution...). Instead of hardcoding sensitive values like API keys or passwords in plaintext within configuration files, the Agent can retrieve them dynamically at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Datadog Agent allows you to securely manage secrets by integrating with any external secrets management solution (HashiCorp Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, a custom solution...). Instead of hardcoding sensitive values like API keys or passwords in plaintext within configuration files, the Agent can retrieve them dynamically at runtime.
```

### How it works

> To reference a secret in your configuration, use the `ENC[<secret_id>]` notation. This tells the Agent to resolve the value using your configured secret retrieval executable. The secret is fetched and loaded into memory—never written to disk or sent to the Datadog backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reference a secret in your configuration, use the `ENC[<secret_id>]` notation. This tells the Agent to resolve the value using your configured secret retrieval executable. The secret is fetched and loaded into memory but is never written to disk or sent to the Datadog backend.
```

For example, the following configuration shows two secrets defined with `ENC[]`:
```
instances:
  - server: db_prod
    user: "ENC[db_prod_user]"
    password: "ENC[db_prod_password]"
```

The secret handle must make up the full value of the YAML field and is always resolved as strings. This means configurations like `password: "db-ENC[prod_password]"` are not be recognized as secrets.

You can use any characters inside the `ENC[]` brackets as long as the YAML is valid. If your secret ID includes special characters or is a JSON string, make sure to properly escape it. For example:
```
"ENC[{\"env\": \"prod\", \"check\": \"postgres\", \"id\": \"user_password\"}]"
```

> It’s also possible to use [Autodiscovery](/agent/kubernetes/integrations/) variables in secret handles. The Agent resolves these variables before resolving the secret. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also possible to use [Autodiscovery](/agent/kubernetes/integrations/) variables in secret handles. The Agent resolves these variables before resolving the secret. For example:
```

* Have no rights for `group` or `other`.
* Have at least exec rights for the owner.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Windows" %}}

On Windows, the executable must:

* Have read/exec for `ddagentuser` (the user used to run the Agent).
* Have no rights for any user or group except for the `Administrators` group, the built-in `Local System` account, or the Agent user context (`ddagentuser` by default)
* Be a valid Win32 application so the Agent can execute it (a PowerShell or Python script would not work for example).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Note**: The executable shares the same environment variables as the Agent.

## Providing a secret retrieval executable

To retrieve secrets, the Agent uses an external executable that you provide. The executable is used when new
secrets are discovered and are cached for the lifecycle of the Agent. If you need to update or rotate a secret, you must restart the Agent to reload it.

The Agent sends this executable a JSON payload over standard input containing a list of secret handles. The executable fetches each secret and returns them in a JSON format through standard output.

> Here’s what the Agent sends to your executable on STDIN:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's what the Agent sends to your executable on STDIN:
```

```
{
  "version": "1.0",
  "secrets": ["secret1", "secret2"]
}
```

* `version` - string: the format version (currently 1.0).

> * `secrets` - list of strings: each string is a handle for a secret to fetch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `secrets` (list of strings): each string is a handle for a secret to fetch.
```

The executable should respond through STDOUT:
```
{
  "secret1": {"value": "decrypted_value", "error": null},
  "secret2": {"value": null, "error": "could not fetch the secret"}
}
```

> * `value` - string: the secret value to be used in the configurations (can be `null` in the case of an error).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `value` (string): the secret value to be used in the configurations. This can be `null` in the case of an error.
```

> * `error` - string: an error message or `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `error` (string): an error message or `null`.
```

      secret:
        secretName: test-secret
```

You can then reference the secret like this:
```
password: ENC[file@/etc/secret-volume/password]
```

**Notes:**
- The Secret must exist in the same namespace as the pod it is being mounted in.
- The script is able to access all subfolders, including the sensitive `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token`. As such, Datadog recommends using a dedicated folder instead of `/var/run/secrets`.

[Docker swarm secrets](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/secrets/) are mounted in the `/run/secrets` folder. For example, the Docker secret `db_prod_passsword` is located in `/run/secrets/db_prod_password` in the Agent container. This would be referenced in the configuration with `ENC[file@/run/secrets/db_prod_password]`.

**Example: Reading a Kubernetes Secret Across Namespaces**

If you want the Agent to read a Secret from a different namespace, use the `k8s_secret@` prefix. For example:
```
password: ENC[k8s_secret@database/database-secret/password]
```

> In this case, you must manually configure RBAC to allow the Agent’s ServiceAccount to read the Secret:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, you must manually configure RBAC to allow the Agent's Service Account to read the Secret:
```

### Option 2: Using a prebuilt executable

If you're using a standard secrets provider like `AWS Secrets Manager`, `AWS SSM` or other, you can use the prebuilt [datadog-secret-backend](https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-secret-backend) executable.

Here's an example showing how to set it up:

1. **Create your secret** in AWS Secrets Manager. The secrets `ARN` in AWS is the secrets handle. example:
  ```
  arn:aws:secretsmanager:us-east-2:111122223333:secret:AgentAPIKey
  ```
2. **Grant your EC2 instance IAM permissions** to read the secret:
   ```
   {
     "Version": "2012-10-17",
     "Statement": [
       {
         "Effect": "Allow",
         "Action": [
           "secretsmanager:GetSecretValue"
         ],
         "Resource": [
           "arn:aws:secretsmanager:us-east-2:111122223333:secret:AgentAPIKey"
         ]
       }
     ]
   }
   ```
3. Download the binary to your EC2 instance and configure it at /datadog-secret-backend.yaml:

> 3. Download the latest release of `datadog-secret-backend` on your EC2 instance and create its configuration `datadog-secret-backend.yaml` next to the binary (more information [here](https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-secret-backend/blob/main/docs/aws/secrets.md)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Download the latest release of `datadog-secret-backend` on your EC2 instance and create its configuration `datadog-secret-backend.yaml` next to the binary (more information [at this link](https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-secret-backend/blob/main/docs/aws/secrets.md)):
```

   ```
   backends:
     staging-aws:
       backend_type: aws.secrets
   ```
   We are configuring one backend of type `aws.secrets` under the name `staging-aws`

> 4. Set the correct access rights for the binary as described [here](#agent-security-requirements):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Set the correct access rights for the binary as described in [Agent security requirements](#agent-security-requirements):
```

    }
  }

  output, err := json.Marshal(res)
  if err != nil {
    fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "could not serialize res: %s", err)
    os.Exit(1)
  }
  fmt.Printf(string(output))
}
```

This transforms your configuration:

```yaml
instances:
  - server: db_prod
    user: ENC[db_prod_user]
    password: ENC[db_prod_password]
```

Into the following in memory:

```yaml
instances:
  - server: db_prod
    user: decrypted_db_prod_user
    password: decrypted_db_prod_password
```

## Refreshing API/APP keys at runtime

Starting in Agent version v7.67, you can configure the Agent to refresh its API and APP keys at regular intervals without requiring a restart. This relies on the API key and APP key being pulled as secrets.

To enable this, set `secret_refresh_interval` (in seconds) in your `datadog.yaml` file:
```yaml
api_key: ENC[<secret_handle>]

secret_backend_command: /path/to/your/executable
secret_refresh_interval: 3600  # refresh every hour
```

By default the Agent randomly spreads its first refresh within the specified `secret_refresh_interval` window. This
means that it resolves the API key at startup, then refreshes it within the first interval and every interval after that.

> This avoids a fleet of Agents to all refresh their API/APP key at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This avoids having a fleet of Agents refreshing their API/APP key at the same time.
```
